[music]
2025 was, in my opinion, a great year
for movies, which sounds a little
strange to say while we're in the midst
of so much doom and gloom about
Hollywood and the industry. But while
the industry itself kind of [music]
crashes out and tries to coagulate into
a giant monopoly, the crews and artists
that are doing the work of crafting the
[music] movies turned out one of the
best and most interesting slates of
films I think we've had in [music]
years. Sure, tiredly shot franchises and
IP based films still [music] largely
dominate the box office, but if you dig
even slightly below the surface, you'll
find weird, gritty, thematically rich
[music] action blockbusters like Danny
Bole's 28 Days Later, where he
constructed this whole rig of [music]
iPhones to shoot some of the most insane
action scenes I've seen in a while. Or
you can find the [music] totally goofy,
surreal sci-fi action comedy Mickey 17
with [music] an expectedly unhinged
performance from Robert Patson.
There was a snappy, entertaining spy
thriller in Steven Soderberg's Black
[music] Bag and one of the most formally
inventive horror films I've seen in a
while in Steven Soderberg's Presence.
And if horror is your thing, Zack Kger
[music] expanded his tonally bizarre
style of horror further with weapons,
which somehow captured both the
absurdity and the eerie [music]
feeling of helplessness that pervades
much of our current time here in
America.
>> I see something that I don't understand
at all.
>> But maybe you're more interested in
movies that use film [music] language to
dive into a psychologically harrowing
inner landscape. In which case, Kristen
Stewart's directorial debut, The
Chronology of Water, gives us a bold and
poetically disjointed exploration of
[music] personal trauma shot on 16 mm
film.
>> This is good.
>> Ah, of course it's good. If more
restrained, downbeat A24 indie drama was
your thing, Sorry Baby was a gently,
bittersweet directorial [music] debut
from Ava Victor, which used editing in
an incredible way, hinging the dramatic
core of the film around a single cut,
and it was a great year for directorial
debuts in general. Besides Sorry, Baby
and Kristen Stewart's debut, I really
enjoyed actor Harris Dickinson's [music]
vaguely surreal urchin about a down on
his luck guy in London trying to make it
[music] and the offbeat comedy of Andrew
D. Young's friendship, which was a
cringe inducing kaleidoscopic look at
male loneliness starring [music] none
other than Tim Robinson. I go see this
new Marvel. People are saying it's
actually nuts. It's driving people
crazy.
>> And that's without even mentioning my
favorite directorial debuts, which I'll
get to in my top 10. And I'm going to
get to those soon. But I want to make
sure I spend some time here with my
honorable mentions because while it's
usually pretty obvious which films
should hit the top of my list, this year
there were so many solid films, I had a
genuinely difficult time narrowing down.
So, how do we decide what the best films
of the year are? Well, no critic is
tapped into some kind of objective
standard. Every best of list is really a
kind of favorites list. So whether or
not my best will align with yours is
mostly a matter of personal taste, but I
can describe some of the qualities in
films that most often [music] resonate
with me. And the movies I get most
excited about usually showcase some
aspect of [music] technically great film
making, like the stunningly beautiful
cinematography of Train Dreams.
or the yet again visually immaculate
[music] set design of the Phoenician
scheme from Wes Anderson, which features
this [music] ethereal opening credit
sequence that was created by having the
actors perform the scene [music] at
double speed while shooting it
simultaneously in slow motion. Great
film making isn't just about [music]
mastering a specific aspect of the
craft, though. What's even better is
when you can apply that craft to the
story in an interesting way. For
example, Michael Cavino's Splitzville
surprised me by having some [music] of
the best, most convincing action
choreography of the year, employed
entirely for comedic effect within a
romcom.
Jay Kelly was both a witty and
sentimental deconstruction of the movie
star, [music] which is asking us to
question the cost of ambition and fame.
And while trying to get us to sympathize
with such a successful yet miserable
character is a little bit of a stretch
in the film, Nola Bombach is one of my
favorite dialogue writers and has such
an offkilter [music]
wit that both George Clooney and Adam
Sandler are perfect for. And the way he
stages actors [music] in conversation is
so inventive that I always enjoy
watching his films. And I have to
mention Kelly Reichart's The Mastermind,
which gives us Josh Oconor in this dryly
funny look at aimless masculinity while
also being a great period piece [music]
and deconstruction of the heist genre. I
could go on and there's still much from
the year that either isn't available yet
or that I haven't [music] had time to
catch up on, but I have to draw the line
somewhere. So, here are my roughly 10
favorite movies from 2025.
Lurker directed by Alex Russell and yet
another directorial debut really
impressed me with its claustrophobic
examination of fame, but more
specifically the kind of parasocial
relationships that can surround internet
celebrity. This movie felt to me like a
kind of nightcrawler for the Instagram
social media era. Filmmakers, I think,
are still figuring out how to explore
and make movies about the new media era
we're living in, with many attempts to
examine the new dynamics of social fame,
feeling kind of heavy-handed, often like
they're coming from the perspective of
an outsider looking in instead of
someone who has actually experienced it.
I don't know if Alex Russell has
actually experienced it, but Lurker
gives us what feels like a more accurate
depiction of this world. It's relatively
contained, but grounded by realistic,
unsettling performances and styled in a
way that feels genuinely tapped into the
more internet- ccentric pop culture
atmosphere of our time. If you're
interested in an exploration of that
sort of underlying kind of antagonistic
power dynamic between audience and
celebrity, fan and famous, that Bo
Burnham has been so obsessed with in his
work, then I think this movie is for
you.
The French New Wave is one of the most
influential film movements in history.
And perhaps the movie that has most
become the poster child of this movement
is Jean Lukdar's debut film, Breathless.
Making a movie about the making of one
of the most influential movies ever made
could easily have become too self-s
serious. But I think Richard Linklater
was the perfect person for the job and
managed to do it in a way that feels
light and weightless, which I think
really honors the kind of playful spirit
in which the original film was made.
[laughter]
and immaculately crafted to look like a
movie that was made in France in the
1950s. Nuvo Vog has a great sense of
authenticity. This movie is a great
example of the difference between a
period film aka something that is set in
a specific time and period film making
or a movie that is made to look and feel
like it was made in a specific time.
That's not to say this movie is trying
to be a Jean Luke Gadar film. Linklater
himself said the goal was more to make
it feel as if the movie was made by
another of Gdar's new wave
contemporaries at that time in France
and it does feel that way. But beyond
the attention to period detail and
filmmaking style, this just happens to
be one of the most relaxed, enjoyable
hangout films in recent memory. The
movie never feels overburdened by the
weight of Breathless's influence. None
of the characters even seem to realize
they're making a movie that will change
the course of filmm which is great
because they didn't know it at the time.
This is a movie I have to admit I'm very
biased towards. I'm exactly the target
audience. It's about a film critic
making his first feature film and I
watched it the same year I've also been
working on my first feature film.
So, I'll freely admit that it will
probably appeal most to people who are
cinnaphiles or filmmakers, but for the
reasons I mentioned above, I think it's
still pretty great for everyone and
worth giving a chance. It's a movie
that, as a filmmaker, makes me feel like
picking up a camera and just making a
film is possible, and I hope it helps
inspire a new generation of independent
filmm.
The first film not based on an existing
franchise, book, IP, or series to land
in the box office top 10 in five years.
Sinner stands as a great example that
original blockbusters can succeed, make
a splash, explore a rich thematic
landscape, all while still being boldly
entertaining and wildly popular. Vampire
movies have always been a way to
excavate the shadows in ourselves and
society. And director Ryan Cougler
follows this tradition while turning his
gaze towards the place where musical
tradition, spirituality, and the forces
of cultural appropriation meet within
the history of black culture in America.
This doesn't mean the movie is stiff or
overburdened with stuffy theory or
exposition. Instead, you'll find its
exploration of these themes done through
powerfully evocative imagery and sound
in scenes like this. And the film
explores its thematic core with nuance
while somehow also maintaining its roots
as an action horror thriller. The music
is incredible. The performances rock. It
looks amazing. It's the first movie to
ever be shot the way it was. Movies can
have rich shadows, deep contrast. Not
everything has to be a washed out gray
malange. Sinners kind of feels like a
miracle right now. the sort of movie
that we hope for and imagine is the
product of a bygone era of film making.
But here it is. Big budget blockbuster
filmmakers and studios, please take
notes from this movie. One of the things
I truly enjoy about cinema is how it can
use sound, images, and editing to
construct a mood, an atmosphere, and
emotion. Cinematic images can manage to
tap almost directly into our feelings.
Certain combinations of image and sound
can work like a musical melody that can
strike some kind of internal chord. We
don't understand exactly why it makes us
feel the way it does. This is a really
valuable tool for helping us access and
allow an outlet for human emotions and
experiences that can be difficult to
quantify with words. Things like grief,
fear, and love where describing those
things is never really going to do them
justice. Our modern world, especially in
the culture of the United States, does
not leave a lot of room for expressing
and processing difficult emotions like
depression or grief. Despite the fact
that everyone at some point faces grief
and depression and anxiety and other
difficult emotions are very common, we
allow space for negative speech like
criticism, anger, and frustration, but
have created a lot of taboos around
actual expressions of deeper emotions
like crying. There's often a lot of
shame associated around expressions of
these emotions for individuals, much
less in communal spaces where these
emotions can be expressed and felt
together. All that to say, there were
three movies this year that really felt
like explorations of these difficult
emotions. The first was the absolutely
haunting sound of falling, which weaves
together the lives of several women
across time, where the camera itself
seems to be the drifting spectre of
death, and which offered several scenes
and images that have lingered with me
all year since I saw the film in the
spring. The second was Lin Ramsay's Die
My Love, an almost primal exploration of
postpartum depression, which doesn't try
to engage with it on an intellectual
level. Doesn't try to explain it away.
Instead, it feels into it, bringing it
to vivid life through the performances
and sound design. I liked both of those
movies, but my pick in this moment is
Khloe Xiao's Hamnit, a movie that
provides a speculative backstory for the
writing of the play Hamlet, but which
taps directly into the nerve of grief
and how grief can be communally shared
and expressed through story. Xiao has
further honed her command of poetic
cinematic imagery and continues to prove
to be the filmmaker who has the best
grasp and command of the kind of
filmmaking tradition that has been
pioneered by Terrence Malik. The true
power of this film is not in the story
or what's said, but in the lyricism of
the imagery alongside the powerful
central performances from Jesse Buckley
and Paul Mscow. Movies that are
exploring this kind of visceral emotion
are often very polarizing for audiences.
If engaging with these heavy emotions is
not what you're in the mood for, a movie
that does that so intensely can feel
overbearing. And because describing the
emotions that these movies grapple with
is difficult and often requires poetry,
they sometimes get tossed aside as
sentimental or cliche. But I often think
about that clip of actor Ethan Hawk
describing how most people don't care
about poetry until a moment where life
leaves them grasping to make sense of
intense and difficult feelings. Cinema,
I think, is one of the few modern spaces
where this kind of grief can be
communally shared. Hamnet is not just a
story about grief, but a story that
reflects directly on storytelling's
capacity to create space where we can
share these difficult feelings together.
In a year of excellent debut feature
films, my favorite of them all comes
from Nigerian director Akenola Davies
Jr., My father's shadow is an incredibly
personal account which in some ways
reminded me of the sensitivity to
fluidity of memory and eye for space
that we saw in Charlotte Wells Afterson.
Another of the great debut films of this
decade. Davies Jr. gives us a loving
portrait of a country in the midst of
political turmoil all seen through the
hazy recollection of childhood. It's
beautifully shot and performed and is
one of those movies where the whole
thing seems to radiate with this energy
coming off of the central character, in
this case the father. And we really
become immersed in what these two
brothers world must have felt like at
that time. It'll be out in theaters in
the US in February. So catch it then if
you have a chance. It's a beautiful film
that I highly recommend for everyone.
As far as I'm aware, there is only one
director who's been served a prison
sentence for the film they made this
year. For over a decade, Iranian
director Jafar Panaya has been making
his movies in secret and then smuggling
them out of the country in direct
defiance of the government banning him
from making films and their continual
censorship of his work. It was just an
accident. A tense, angry, and at times
even funny political thriller is a great
movie even without the context of how it
was made and what the director has gone
through to bring it to your screen. But
understanding the backstory and that
Panay based this film on stories from
his time in prison and faces yet another
prison sentence for making it only adds
to the depth of the themes it explores.
The movie is grappling with how we
should respond to and live with
authoritarian oppression. What kind of
response is required or justified from
those under its thumb? And what
impresses me about all of Panay's work
for how radical his political defiance
is is that his films never lack a sort
of tenderness. There's always humanity,
humility, and even a sense of humor.
It's rare to find someone whose work is
so politically bold and conscious
without becoming overly reductive
propaganda. Watch it once to take in the
story and then watch it again and pay
close attention to how the necessity of
filming in secret manifests in his film
making technique and the incredible
artistry he uses to work around those
constraints. Speaking of politics, there
were a few directors this year that
presented films that felt to me like
their absurdest take on what I'll call
the political situation in America. Ari
reflected the narcissism of co era
politics back to us in the darkly
nihilistic and funny Edington, a movie
where all that is needed to really
understand the premise is a look at the
poster. I like that Aster's take
showcases one of the forces that I think
has been truly central in spiraling us
into this mess.
>> You're consuming content on the internet
that is reinforcing this sort of warped
subjective idea of reality.
>> This is your best shot at me. On the
other hand, Yoros Lanthmos's Beonia
examined the political climate through
the lens of a tense showdown between an
alienated underclass that views its
predicament through a conspiratorial
lens and a billionaire class that
appears alien to normal people. I liked
both of those movies, but my favorite
absurdest political thriller this year,
it's amazing that we even get to choose
between three, was Paul Thomas
Anderson's One Battle After Another,
which pitted a burntout revolutionary
against a fascist goon that felt like he
walked off the set of Doctor Strange
Love. PTA's vision of the political
landscape is in some ways more
incendiary than Aers or Lanthamos's, but
quietly in a way more hopeful. The real
heroes in this movie are found in its
periphery, stoically doing what needs to
be done to protect the human lives
around them. But it actually has heroes,
unlike Beonia and Edington, where it
feels like we are too far gone. One
battle after another suggests that maybe
trust and human connection can at least
get us through for now. But what I
really loved about one battle after
another was not its political frame or
subject matter, but simply the
propulsive energy.
>> You win some and you lose some. Bob,
>> the score is insane. My favorite of the
year. It has non-stop pacing. The dirty
cinematography is a mess, but somehow
incredibly beautiful.
>> You know what freedom is?
>> What? No fear. Characters and story are
some of the most important elements of
any film, but it's impossible to
separate those things from how they are
presented in a film. And one battle
after another just has this incredible
energy that hooked me the entire time.
And ultimately, that's what makes it my
pick for this slot. One of the things I
love most about cinema is its ability to
transport us somewhere new. And from the
opening moments until the end of Surat,
I was taken to a place I had never been
to before. What was at the core of why I
loved Surat was a certain kind of
feeling in its atmosphere that it's hard
to even describe, but I had never felt
it before in a film.
It's not the only thing Sarat does well,
but one of its most interesting
features, I think, is its use of EDM as
a score. Electronic dance music usually
only shows up in movies when it's being
played in a club or when it's used as
high energy propulsion during an action
scene or something. But anyone who has
spent any time in the rave scene or dug
beneath the surface of pop EDM knows
that there's more dimension there. That
this music is often crafted and used to
create a kind of trance or spiritual
atmosphere. That there's a tenuous
relationship between the bliss of
forgetting yourself in that trance and
something potentially darker. Surat
brings this to light both in how it uses
EDM as score and also in how it examines
rave culture within the story. It shows
us why this appeals to people, why
people use it to explore and escape
their trauma, but it's not blind to a
certain kind of privilege that can be
involved. the kind that we see expressed
sometimes in places like Burning Man,
where the physical hardship of survival
that some people face as a daily reality
is a play thing for the comfortable who
are trying to escape the enwi of modern
life. But it also shows us how nature
does not play favorites, how life still
always hangs in the balance and that the
desert is no respector of persons.
>> [laughter]
>> War has been one of the perennial
subjects in film with so many great
directors trying their hand at exploring
the subject from many different angles.
But we have perhaps never had such an
intimate and direct look into the actual
reality of war as the one revealed to us
through 2,000 meters to Andria, a new
documentary from director Mistlav
Shernov, who won an Oscar for best
documentary a few years ago for his film
20 days in Marupole. 2,000 meters gives
us a firsterson look at Ukraine's fight
to claim one small village. And through
this, we get a horrifying glimpse of
what 21st century war actually looks
like. Shernov's lens on this conflict
though expands the scope of the film
beyond Russia's invasion into Ukraine.
It certainly is about that, but it also
helps us understand the nature of the
struggle over territory that has forever
punctuated human history. Or maybe
understand is the wrong word. It helps
us see it and in a way confront the fact
that it can't be understood.
For as long as war has been a subject in
film, the ethics of war films have also
been a topic of discussion. How is it
even possible to make a film that
depicts the reality of war without in
some way valorizing or glorifying it?
There are movies like this year's
Warfare from Alex Garland that tries to
critique war by stripping combat of any
context, reducing it only to the utter
horror and visceral chaos of violence.
That kind of film depicts war as a
pointless empty hell. But while this may
be true of the violence of combat, war
itself as it exists in the world is
never actually devoid of context. There
are reasons why people are attacked.
There are reasons why they fight back.
However, cinema must tread lightly here
because it is often in showcasing the
reasons for a conflict that a war film
can become myopic or distance us from
the violence, making it too abstract and
losing sight of the real horror of war
by reductively turning the human lives
involved into heroic pawns or nameless
victims on a political chessboard. In
2000 Meters, Chernov finds his way
through this tension, not by avoiding it
or trying to resolve it, but instead by
looking directly at it.
This is a film not just about the
Russian invasion of Ukraine, but about
war, not just about war, but about the
role cameras play in constructing the
narratives that surround war. It's one
of the most heavy documentaries I've
seen in a long time. It's not for the
faint of heart. My recommendation comes
with a warning label, but it achieves
something incredible by offering us a
new glimpse into one of the most
thoroughly examined subjects in film
history, as well as a newsworthy account
of a struggle that is still unfolding
today.
There are few things I find more
enthralling in movies than just really
well-written and performed
psychologically rich characters and
stories where watching the film is a
process of slowly uncovering a whole
world of subtext surrounding those
characters and their interactions. Some
of my favorite movies of all time are
Burman's classics. He had a way of
crafting films that seemed to bring you
into contact with a character's soul.
these kind of unflinching examinations
of the existentially sticky heart of
life and each character's struggle with
that life and their desire to be seen by
each other and their inability to bridge
whatever unspeakable golf separates them
from others.
Sentimental Value opens with a poetic
ode to a house in one of the most
beautifully shot sequences of the year
which gives us a wonderful introduction
to the family we'll be watching a movie
about but which also establishes a
physical space that will become a
symbolic backdrop for the rest of the
film. Matt, an architect friend of mine
said it was one of the most spatially
aware movies he had seen since Parasite.
And I have to agree, this movie does an
incredibly good job of conveying how a
space like a house can start to take on
the weight of what happens there. As
we're watching the movie, we're aware of
and haunted by the space in the same way
the family is. Take a look at this scene
where there's an argument between the
father played wonderfully by Stellin
Scarsgard and his oldest daughter played
by Renee Reniv. There's a whole drama
playing out in the dialogue, but if you
watch closely, there's an entire second
layer of drama playing out on all three
of their faces as we watch them become
aware of and then become frustrated by
the familial dynamic that is playing out
between them. All of this doesn't just
add depth to this movie, it's necessary
for the story because it's a movie about
all the things that we don't know how to
say to each other. There's also a whole
metaodern layer to the story that is
examining the way art is used to express
emotion and how it can bridge gaps
between people where language makes
understanding difficult. All of which I
love. But it does this, I think, without
becoming overburdened or too
self-reerential and meta in a way that
undercuts the tangibility of the story.
Ultimately, the reason this is currently
my favorite film of the year is just
because of the beauty and emotional
depth that are in these performances,
especially from Eningga Lelos's turn as
Agnes. These kind of performances are
just really rare in film and yet when
they're achieved, they're probably my
favorite thing to watch on screen. And
with moments that grip you so deeply,
everything else in the film just kind of
falls away. There are a lot of layers
here to uncover and elements of the
story that grow deeper with each
viewing. And it's maybe one of the best
movies I've ever seen about depression
that isn't itself just horribly
depressing. So if you like movies like
Tar After Sun Bergman films like Autumn
Sonata or Wild Strawberries or a movie
like Phantom Thread, I would be pretty
surprised if you didn't like this one as
well. So, those are my favorite movies
of 2025, at least based on what I've
seen so far. If I didn't mention one
that you love, there's a decent chance.
I just haven't seen it yet. So, let me
know in the comments which were your
favorites of the year. I'm excited about
2026. There's a lot of great movies
coming up next year, including some of
the ones on this list that have yet to
be released. Among the movies released
in 2026 will be my very first
featurelength documentary film. Out of a
flood is a firsthand account of how my
community responded to the devastation
of Hurricane Helen when it struck
western North Carolina in 2024. I have a
lot more to say and announce about this
movie in the coming year. But if you
want the most up-to-date information,
you can get that by subscribing to my
newsletter at seeingth throughfilm.com
or by joining my Patreon at
patreon.com/thomasflight.
The folks subscribed at those places
will get updates as soon as they're
available. I hope you have a great new
year and watch some incredible films.
This video was made possible by my
sponsor, Give Well. 2025 might have been
a great year for the movies, but it
continues to be a difficult time for
many people all around the world, as
some of the movies illustrate. If you're
looking for ways to give back and help,
navigating the world of all the possible
nonprofits you could give to can feel
incredibly daunting. How do you ensure
the money you donate is having a
tangible, meaningful impact on people's
lives? Give Well, the sponsor for this
video, is an organization that helps
with just that. They spent 18 years
meticulously researching global health
and poverty alleviation to find the
giving opportunities that save or
improve more lives per dollar. I've used
Give Well for years to help make
informed decisions. And along with over
150,000 other donors, we've directed
more than $2.5 billion to their
recommended charities. Rigorous evidence
suggests that these donations will save
over 300,000 lives and improve the lives
of millions more. For example, their
research details how just $2 delivers a
vitamin A supplement to children that
can prevent life-threatening
deficiencies. But you can find all of
their research and recommendations on
the site for free. And thanks to donors
who sponsor their research, Give Well
doesn't even take a cut from your tax
deductible donations. So, this is the
rare sponsor read where I'm not trying
to sell you anything. I just get to tell
you about an excellent resource that's
available, which has helped inform my
own giving decisions and that I think
you will find helpful as well. If this
is your first time giving through Give
Well, you can have your donation matched
for up to $100 before the end of the
year or as long as matching funds last.
And to claim that match, just go to
givewell.org, pick YouTube, and enter
Thomas Flight at checkout. Just make
sure they know you heard about Give Well
from me to get that donation matched.
Again, that's givewell.org to donate or
browse their research and learn more.
Thanks again to Give Well for their
support of this video.